---
layout: post
title:  "Unlocking your keyboard's potential"
date:   2021-11-21 09:00:00 -0500
categories: Linux Tips Bash Terminal Keyboard
---

When I first started using a computer I had a mouse. I could never imagine using
a computer without one. It seemed essential. However, I knew that before there
were Graphical User Interfaces or GUIs, people used computers using just their
keyboards. I just thought that was poor and inefficient. I couldn't have been
more wrong!

It's taken me nearly 30 years of using the computer to realize the mouse is
really a crutch, and so are GUIs. Don't get me wrong, without GUIs there is no
image processing or video editing or gaming and I totally love those things. But
the basics of interacting with a computer have always been in using commands.
The mouse and the GUI allow us to wrap these commands in more colorful and shiny
things. However, each time your mouse clicks on something, the system is
executing some kind of command underneath, behind the scenes. And using a
keyboard with the command-line-interface just brings you a step closer to what's
going on.

I understand these things have layers, obviously when I execute a command, it's
running a binary underneath, but I can't understand machine language, so I'll
stick to this layer of understanding commands as being pivotal.

## Flow

Most people, when they use computers use a mouse and a keyboard together.
Everytime something needs to happen with the mouse, their hand leaves the
keyboard, grabs the mouse performs some type of movement and click, sometimes
multiple of these before returning to the keyboard. Many people might even find
themselves using the mouse more than the keyboard if all they're doing is
scrolling through content and clicking buttons to interact with the applications
they are using.

However, most work involves some form of typing and when your hand travels
between the keyboard and the mouse, your'e experiencing downtime. This is hard
to really comprehend until you feel the 'flow' of using a computer with your
hand barely ever leaving the keyboard. When you get more used to this mode of
using a computer, you start realizing how much faster you tend to do things.
Even browsing and clicking buttons becomes faster when you use the appropriate
key-bindings to do so instead of a mouse.

## Vim

In order to use the keyboard with this kind of flow, you need to familiarize
yourself with 'vim'. Vim is a newer version of 'vi' an ancient tool at this
point to edit text on a terminal. Although this tool is almost 50 years old
now, it has stood the test of time and is still a go-to tool for most computer
engineers and power users. Vi or Vim allows you to edit text files and navigate
through them with great efficiency.

To start learning vim you could try the ```vimtutor``` program. It's a steep
learning curve, with learning to use the keys like 'j','k','h' and 'l' to move
down, up, left and right through a document. However as you start learing and
getting used to it, your brain will develop a muscle memory for this and it will
become natural over time. These keys also happen to be the closest keys to your
fingers in the middle row of a keyboard and your speed gain will be tremendous.

## Vimium

Once you get used to using the vim shortcuts you can expand this to other parts
of your computer. For example, Firefox and Chrome browsers have an addon called
'Vimium' this allows you to browse through a Web page using vim shortcuts. This
makes it extremely fast when browsing and viewing content on websites. You can
click on any link using the 'f' + 'key-combo' shortcuts. And you'll find
yourself sailing through content.

## Conclusion

Eventually you'll find yourself turning on your computer and accomplishing
nearly everything just using the keyboard. Once you get to this state, using a
computer will almost become like playing a piano.

Music to your ears! :)

Cheers.
